AVANTGO.COM AND UNIX DESKTOPS 
=============================

AvantGo.com is a web capture and browsing service for handheld
devices.  The setup incudes software on both your Palm device and your
desktop and an account on the AvantGo.com site.  If you have a modem
(wireless or wired) for your Palm, you technically do not need the
desktop software, though you'll probably want it anyway.

This readme includes instructions for using a desktop Unix system to
sync your Palm V, III, IIIx, VII, or PalmPilot Professional
(collectively, "Palm device") to an AvantGo.com account.

There is currently no method for synchronizing your Windows CE device
to AvantGo.com through a Unix desktop.

Support: 
--------

THIS PRODUCT IS NOT OFFICIALLY SUPPORTED BY AVANTGO.  IT IS PROVIDED
AS IS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE UNIX COMMUNITY.

For support, please use one of the following:

- The pilot-unix mailing list.  To participate in this list, send a
message to pilot-unix-request@lists.best.com with the body containing
(on separate lines) "subscribe" or "help".

- The newsgroups news://comp.sys.palmtops.pilot,
news://alt.soft-sys.avantgo, or news://de.comp.sys.palmtops.pilot
(German)

What You'll Need: 
-----------------

malsync

   This is the actual synchronization executable.
   Get it from http://www.tomw.org/malsync
   Available in source or binary forms
   View the README in the source/binary directory for build
instructions.

Palm OS .prc files

   Specifically libmal.prc, MobileLink.prc, and avantgo.prc
   You will need to install these using pilot-xfer or Mac/Win Hotsync
   Included with malsync, or from
   http://www.avantgo.com/download/unsupported

pilot-xfer

   Unix utility to install .prc files to Palm OS devices.
   Included with the pilot-link utility.  V 0.9.3 is known to work.
   Get it from ftp://ryeham.ee.ryerson.ca/pub/PalmOS/
   Use 'make pilot-xfer' once uncompressed


Instructions: 
-------------

1) Copy the built executable (malsync) to the chosen directory and
   change it to an executable permission, e.g.:

    chmod ugo+x ./malsync

2) Determine the correct serial port to which your Palm device is
connected.
   Two common options are /dev/ttyS0 and /dev/ttyS1.  Do one of two
things:

   - set the PILOTPORT environment variable to that device, e.g.

      setenv PILOTPORT /dev/ttyS1
  
   - OR, bind the /dev/pilot port to the serial device, e.g.

      ln -s /dev/ttyS1 /dev/pilot (root access required)

3) Determine and set the correct communication speed.  Taking no
action
   will result in 9600 baud connection.  An alternative might be:

      setenv PILOTRATE 57600

4) Transfer the .prc's to the Palm device with pilot-xfer:

      pilot-xfer -i MobileLink.prc libmal.prc avantgo.prc

When the sync is finished, click on the Applications button of the
Palm device.  A successful pilot-xfer will result in AvantGo and
Mobile Link icons appearing in this list.

5) Now you will need to set up your AvantGo account.

- 
Go to http://avantgo.com/setup/account_only.html and select the Palm
Computing link.  - Continue through the install pages until you hit
the page where you'll enter account information.  - Enter your account
information and submit the page.  Write down the username and password
you used here.

Note: The site changes periodically, so the exact URL may be
different.

5) Tap the Mobile Link icon on the Palm device.  Enter this
information:

        Server: AvantGo Server
   Server Addr: sync.avantgo.com
          Port: 80
     User Name: <your AvantGo.com username>
      Password: <your AvantGo.com password>
       Enabled: Should be checked

6) In the directory in which you've put malsync, enter

      ./malsync (use options if necessary)

This should retrieve the stated channels from AvantGo.com.  A
successful sync will result in these channels showing on your Palm
device.
