$NetBSD: epsg-license,v 1.2 2007/07/28 11:06:36 gdt Exp $

EPSG LICENSE CONDITIONS

Use of the Data

The user assumes the entire risk as to the accuracy and the use of
this data. The data may be used, copied and distributed subject to the
following conditions

1. INFORMATION PROVIDED IN THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED "AS IS" WITHOUT
WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND/OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

2. The data may be included in any commercial package provided that
any commerciality is based on value added by the provider and not on a
value ascribed to the EPSG dataset which is made available at no
charge. The ownership of the EPSG dataset [OGP] must be acknowledged.

3. Subsets of information may be extracted from the dataset. Users are
advised that coordinate reference system and coordinate transformation
descriptions are incomplete unless all elements detailed as essential
in OGP Surveying and Positioning Guidance Note 7-1 annex F are
included.

4. Essental elements should preferably be reproduced as described in
the dataset. Modification of parameter values is permitted as
described in the table below [*] to allow change to the content of the
information provided that numeric equivalence is achieved. Numeric
equivalence refers to the results of geodetic calculations in which
the parameters are used, for example (i) conversion of ellipsoid
defining parameters, or (ii) conversion of parameters between one and
two standard parallel projection methods, or (iii) conversion of
parameters between 7-parameter geocentric transformation methods.

5.  No data that has been modified other than as permitted in these
terms and conditions shall be described as or attributed to the EPSG
dataset

---
[*] The full contents of this table are available in the following
    locations:
    - The EPSG web site: http://www.epsg.org/
    - The file epsg-v6_13_Readme.pdf, which is distributed within the
      geography/epsg package.
    - The OGP Surveying and Positioning Guidance Note 7-1, which is
      within the geography/epsg-docs package.
