END-USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
FOR F-PROT ANTIVIRUS

This is a binding, legal agreement between the end user (the
"licensee") and Frisk Software International ("FSI") for the F-Prot
Antivirus software product, which includes the software program,
material and online or electronic documentation. By installing,
copying, downloading, accessing or otherwise using the F-Prot
Antivirus software you agree to be bound by the terms of this
Agreement. If you do not agree to the terms of this agreement you may
not download, install or use the F-Prot Antivirus software product,
but return it to your place of purchase.

Software Product License

1. Scope of license: The license granted hereunder applies to one of
the following versions of the F-Prot Antivirus software product as
provided by FSI to the licensee:

1.1. F-Prot Antivirus for Windows: License applies to any computer(s)
as indicated by the invoice.

1.2. F-Prot Antivirus for Exchange: License applies only to mail
servers, mail relays and mail gateways, i.e., computers that provide
mail services to a network, for either in-coming or out-going e-mail.

1.3. F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD Mail Servers version: License
applies only to mail servers, mail relays and mail gateways, i.e.,
computers that provide mail services to a network, for either
in-coming or out-going e-mail.

1.4. F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD File Servers version: License
applies only to file, print and application servers, i.e., computers
that provide network services other than mail services.

1.5. F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD Workstations version: License
applies only to one single workstation and any files stored
locally. If the workstation provides network services then a File
Server or Mail Server license is required.

1.6. F-Prot Antivirus for AIX: License applies to servers, i.e.,
computers that provide mail services to a network, for either
in-coming or out-going e-mail, or servers that provide network
services other than mail services.

1.7. F-Prot Antivirus for Solaris Mail Servers version: License
applies only to mail servers, mail relays and mail gateways, i.e.,
computers that provide mail services to a network, for either
in-coming or out-going e-mail.

1.8. F-Prot Antivirus for Solaris File Servers version: License
applies only to file, print and application servers, i.e., computers
that provide network services other than mail services.

1.9. F-Prot Antivirus for Solaris Workstations version: License
applies only to one single workstation and any files stored
locally. If the workstation provides network services then a File
Server or Mail Server license is required.

1.10. F-Prot Antivirus for DOS: License applies to any computer(s) as
indicated by the invoice.

2. Grant of License:

2.1. Software Product: FSI grants the licensee a non-exclusive,
non-transferable license to use the F-Prot Antivirus software product
on any computer/computers owned by the licensee, effective as stated
in the invoice. The licensee may make one copy solely for backup and
archival purposes. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
agreement the licensee may not otherwise make copies of the F-Prot
Antivirus software product or the printed material accompanying
therewith.

2.2. Installation:

2.2.1. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Windows software
product, the corporate user version, for the number of computers
purchased from FSI. Users who have bought F-Prot Antivirus for Windows
software product, the home user version, may install it on all
computers in their household that are used for personal purposes.

2.2.2. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Exchange software
product for the number of mailboxes covered by your FSI license.

2.2.3. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD Mail Servers
software product for the number of users covered by your FSI license.

2.2.4. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD File Servers
version software product for the number of servers covered by your FSI
license.

2.2.5. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Linux/BSD Workstations
software product for the number of workstations covered by your FSI
license.

2.2.6. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for AIX software product
for the number of users covered by your FSI license.

2.2.7. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for Solaris software
product for the number of users covered by your FSI license.

2.2.8. You may install the F-Prot Antivirus for DOS software product
for the number of computers covered by your FSI license.

3. Description of other Rights and Limitations

3.1. Not for resale: The F-Prot Antivirus is limited for your personal
or professional use only, and not for resale, or otherwise to transfer
for value the software product.

3.2. Limitation on Reverse Engineering, Decompilation and Disassembly:
The licensee may not reverse engineer, decompile, or disassemble the
software product, except and only to the extent such activity is
expressly permitted by applicable law.

3.3. Rental: Licensee may not rent, lease or lend the software product.

3.4. Services and Technical support: FSI may provide you with support
services related to the software product as deemed necessary.

3.5. Termination: Without prejudice to any other rights, FSI may
terminate this Agreement if you fail to comply with the terms and
conditions of the Agreement. In such event, you must destroy and
remove all copies of the software product and all of its component
parts.

3.6. Updates: You may discover a new virus, unknown to FSI, and send
it to FSI, who will provide the licensee with an updated version of
the F-Prot Antivirus software program as soon as possible.

4. Copyright: All title and intellectual property right in and to the
F-Prot Antivirus, the accompanying printed materials and any copies
obtained from the Internet are owned by FSI. All title and
intellectual property right in and to the content, which may be
accessed through use of the F-Prot Antivirus, is the property of the
respective content owner and may be protected by applicable copyright
or other intellectual property laws. This Agreement grants no right to
use such content. All rights not expressly granted are reserved by
FSI.

5. Limited Warranty: FSI warrants that the F-Prot Antivirus will
perform substantially in accordance with any specifications provided
for the period of time established by applicable law from the date of
purchase. The Licensee understands and agrees that the software
product is provided "as is", with all faults that may accompany
software products. FSI warrants that any diskettes provided are free
of any physical defects.

6. Warranty Exclusions: FSI makes no other express or implied
warranties, regarding the performance of the software included in the
F-Prot Antivirus software program, but will use its best efforts to
promptly correct any errors in the said software that are reported by
Licensee. FSI may attempt to correct errors through the means it
determines to be most appropriate. Errors caused by hardware
malfunctions or failure, or by loss of data or disruption of services
over the Internet due to third party, are expressly excluded.

7. Limitation of Liability: FSI shall not be liable for any indirect,
consequential, incidental, or punitive damages or attorney fees for
any cause of action, in tort or contract, regardless of whether FSI
was aware of the possibility of such damages. Licensee's exclusive
remedy shall be the amounts licensee paid FSI.

8. Disputes: Any disputes arising out of the inception, application or
interpretation of this agreement shall be settled in accordance with
the laws of Iceland and the exclusive jurisdiction of the applicable
court in Iceland.
