PVS

TM License Agreement

Computer Science Laboratory

SRI International Menlo Park CA 94025 USA

Email: pvs-request@csl.sri.com
www: http://www.csl.sri.com/pvs.html
Phone: +1 (650) 859-5456
Fax: +1 (650) 859-2844

June 28, 1999

Please provide the information requested on pages 1, 4, and (if outside the
USA) 5, sign, and return to Dr DWJ Stringer-Calvert at the address above.

There is no need to complete a new agreement if you already have a properly
executed license for an earlier version of PVS.

Although not part of the agreement, we appreciate it if you will inform us at
pvs-bugs@csl.sri.com of any bugs that you discover, and notify us at
pvs-request@csl.sri.com of interesting applications you have made of PVS and
of any papers or reports describing your use of the system.


SRI INTERNATIONAL END-USE LICENSE AGREEMENT

SOFTWARE PROGRAM: PVSTM

GRANT SRI International ("SRI") hereby grants to

a royalty-free, non-exclusive, non-transferable license under the Licensed IP
to use its

enter business name

accompanying, above referenced software program ("Software") and related
documentation ("Documentation") upon the terms and conditions set forth below:

Definitions

"Licensed Software" means the Software, and any larger applications in which
such Software is incorporated.

"Licensed IP" means all patent claims, copyright, and trade secrets owned or
freely licensable by SRI that are embodied in or necessarily practiced by the
Software.

"Non-Commercial Purposes" means usage of Licensed Software (a) by an official
governmental agency, strictly for non-commercial, public benefit purposes, or
(b) solely for non-commercial research purposes in exchange for which no
financially valuable consideration (including but not limited to sales or
license revenue, service revenue, and advertising revenue, and whether in the
form of monetary, equity, or other forms of consideration) is received, except
for research funding received from an official government agency sponsor.

You may: (a) use or copy the Licensed Software solely for Non-Commercial
Purposes; (b) distribute copies of the Licensed Software solely for
Non-Commercial Purposes and only if such copies are distributed free of charge
to all recipients (including one copy free of charge to Licensor) and subject
to this Agreement. Any copies of Licensed Software distributed under this
Agreement must include a copy of the following notice to recipients
prominently displayed:

This software is subject to the SRI International End-Use License Agreement
for the PVS (tm) software package (the "License"). You may not use, copy, or
distribute this software except in compliance with the License, and except
after submitting a signed copy of the License to SRI. You may obtain a copy of
the License at http://pvs.csl.sri.com/license.html or by sending email to
pvs-request@csl.sri.com. Software distributed under the License is distributed
on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
under the License. Portions of the software are Copyright (c) SRI
International. All rights reserved. "PVS" is a trademark of SRI International,
a California nonprofit public benefit corporation.



You may not: modify the Software, or decompile, disassemble, or otherwise copy
the Software in modified form; or publish, distribute, or transfer copies of
the Licensed Software to any third party except under the limited terms set
forth above. These examples are by way of illustration, not limitation; except
as expressly set forth above (under "You may"), no other license rights are
implied or otherwise granted under this License Agreement.

TITLE SRI retains title, ownership rights, and intellectual property rights in
and to the Software and Documentation. The Software is protected by the
copyright laws of the United States and international copyright treaties.

DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY Since this Software is a research tool still in the
development stage and is provided free of charge, the Software and
Documentation are provided on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE OR DOCUMENTATION WILL
NOT INFRINGE ANY PATENTS, COPYRIGHTS, TRADEMARKS, OR OTHER RIGHTS. The entire
risk as to the quality and performance of the Software and/or Documentation is
borne by you. Should the Software and/or Documentation prove defective, you
and not SRI assume the entire cost of any services and repair. This disclaimer
of warranty constitutes an essential part of the agreement.

LIMITATION OF LIABILITY UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY,
TORT, CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL SRI, SRI'S AGENTS, OFFICERS, ASSISTANTS
AND EMPLOYEES EITHER IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL CAPACITIES OR BY REASON OF THEIR
RELATIONSHIP TO SRI AND SRI'S SUCCESSORS, BE HELD LIABLE TO YOU OR ANY OTHER
PERSON FOR ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY
CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK
STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER COMMERCIAL
DAMAGES OR LOSSES. IN NO EVENT SHALL SRI BE LIABLE FOR COSTS OF PROCUREMENT OF
SUBSTITUTE OR REPLACEMENT PRODUCTS OR SERVICES.

NO SUPPORT, NO UPDATES This license does not grant you any right to any
Software support, enhancements or updates.



TERMINATION

This license will terminate automatically if you fail to comply with the
limitations described above. On termination, you must destroy all copies of
the Software.

EXPORT RESTRICTIONS Each party hereby acknowledges that the rights and
obligations of this Agreement are subject to the laws and regulations of the
United States relating to the export of products and technical information.
Without limitation, each party shall comply with all such applicable laws and
regulations.

U.S. GOVERNMENT RESTRICTED RIGHTS If the Software or any accompanying
documentation is used or acquired by or on behalf of any unit, division or
agency of the United States Government, this provision applies. The Software
and any accompanying documentation is provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS. The
use, modification, reproduction, release, display, duplication or disclosure
thereof by or on behalf of any unit, division or agency of the Government is
subject to the restrictions set forth in subdivision (c)(1) of the Commercial
Computer Software-Restricted Rights clause at 48 CFR 52.227-19 and the
restrictions set forth in the Rights in Technical Data-Noncommercial Items
clause set forth in 48 CFR 252.227-7013. The contractor/manufacturer of the
Software and accompanying documentation is SRI International, 333 Ravenswood
Avenue, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA.

MISCELLANEOUS This agreement represents the complete agreement concerning this
license between the parties and supersedes all prior agreement and
representations between them. It may be amended only by a writing executed by
both parties. If any provision of this Agreement is held to be unenforceable
for any reason, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary
to make it enforceable. This agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of California, without regard to the
conflicts of law principles thereof, and shall not be governed by the United
Nations convention on contracts for the international sale of goods.



SIGNATURES

 The licensed material is provided for the use of LICENSEE at the following
SITE/FACILITY only: Enter location where PVS will be used

Facility:
Address:

Enter name and address of person for correspondence

Name:
Address:

(leave address blank if same as above)

Phone:
Fax:
Email:

In the spaces below on the right, enter the name of your business or
institution. The person signing below the business name should be someone who
has the legal authority to sign for your business or institution. That
person's position of authority (title) in the business or institution should
be entered on the next line. Return the completed license to SRI at the
address on the cover; SRI will countersign on the left below and return to you
at the address you enter above.

LICENSOR: SRI International

By Title Date

LICENSEE: By Title Date

enter business name enter signature enter business title



END-USE STATEMENT

Use of PVS outside the USA may be subject to US Government export licensing
requirements. The requirements are dependent on the use to be made of PVS.
Overseas users must therefore submit with their completed license a statement
of the end-use to which they plan to put the software.

If it applies to your use of PVS, we suggest you use the following form of
words:

PVS will be used to conduct basic and applied research. It is intended that
the results of the research will be made generally available, and published
should they merit it.

If your use of PVS will concern something other than research, or if the
results will be restricted for proprietary or national security reasons, then
please provide explicit details in your end-use statement.

Please write or type your end-use statement below.


