TNT-MMTL, the Multilayer Multiconductor Transmission Line 2-D and 2.5-D
electromagnetic modeling tool suite, generates transmission parameters
and SPICE models from descriptions of electronics interconnect
dimensions and materials properties.

MMTL programs and supporting libraries and documentation have been
under development at the Mayo Clinic since the mid-1980s. The programs
were developed under government sponsored electronics research
programs in the Special Purpose Processor Development Group
(SPPDG). They have been employed extensively at Mayo and distributed
to some government agencies and research collaborators. At the
beginning of 2004, we decided to release the TNT graphical front-end
and MMTL programs as free software under the GNU General Public
License (GPL).  Technically, MMTL programs are in the class of 2-D and
2.5-D "field solvers", which convert dimensions and materials
properties into electronic design parameters. The MMTL suite consists
of several programs, including lossy, loss-free, quasi-static, and
full-wave simulators. Circuit parameters are computed by either the
method of moments (MOM) or finite element methods (FEM). Basic
per-unit-length parameters are generated by the simulator, and can be
converted into HSPICE W-element models. MMTL is similar in many ways
to commercial field solver products which typically cost thousands of
dollars.
