===========================================================================
$NetBSD: MESSAGE,v 1.2 2001/11/11 06:17:27 hubertf Exp $

These files contain all the code from The Unix Programming
Environment, by Brian Kernighan and Rob Pike (Prentice-Hall,
1984, ISBN 0-13-937681-X).  A separate hoc6 distribution contains
any fixes that we have applied to that; the version in this file
is from the book.

Copyright (C) Lucent Technologies, 1997.  All Rights Reserved

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all
copies and that both the copyright notice and this permission
notice and warranty disclaimer appear in supporting
documentation, and that the name of Lucent Technologies or any of
its entities not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining
to distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.

LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS
SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND
FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL LUCENT OR ANY OF ITS ENTITIES BE
LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY
DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS
ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
===========================================================================
